In the last two lessons we've demonstrated
ways you can simulate a Markov chain
whose stationary distribution
is the target distribution.
Usually our target distribution
is the posterior distribution for
the parameters we are trying to estimate.
Before using simulated chains
to obtain Monte Carlo estimates,
we should first ask ourselves
the following question.
Has our simulated Markov chain converged
to its stationary distribution yet?
Unfortunately this is
a difficult question to answer.
But we can do several
things to investigate.
Throughout this lesson we're going
to focus less on the code and
more on the plots.
Our first visual tool for
assessing chains and
one that you've already seen in
previous examples is the trace plot.
Here's an example of a trace plot.
A trace plot shows the history
of a parameter value across
iterations of the chain.
Here we have iterations across the x-axis.
It shows you precisely where
the chain has been exploring.
First, let's talk about what
a chain should look like.
Here is an example of a chain
that has most likely converged.
If the chain is stationary, it should
not be showing any long-term trends.
The average value for the chain,
should be roughly flat.
And it should not be wondering,
as we will show in the next example.
It appears that this trace plot
is tracing the same distribution.
It looks like it's approximately
a normal distribution, across iterations
Let's look at an example of
a chain that is wandering.
In this example, the step size of
the random walk sampler is too small,
and so it take many iterations for the
chain to traverse across the distribution.
We're seeing long term trends here.
For example,
if we were going to estimate the mean
using only the first 200 iterations.
We would get a very different
answer than if we were to estimate
the mean using iterations 600 through 800.
If this is the case,
you will need to run the chain for
many, many more iterations as we see here.
It turns out, this is the exact
same chain that we were just
looking at except it's on
a much larger time scale.
Instead of a few hundred iterations, we
are looking at about 100,000 iterations.
On this larger time scale it
appears that we have converged.
One major difference between
the two chains we've looked at is
the level of autocorrelation in each.
Autocorrelation is a number
between negative 1 and
positive 1 which measures
how linearly dependent
the current value of the chain
is to past values called lags.
We will provide more details about auto
correlation in a supplementary document.
We can see and inspect auto correlation
using the auto correlation plot
in the CODA package, so
let's first load the CODA package.
And to look at the auto correlation plot,
we're going to use
the autocorr.plot function.
Let's look first at the auto correlation
in our good example that had converged.
This diagnostic calculates the
autocorrelation against different logs.
For example, at the 0th lag,
a value in the chain has perfect
autocorrelation with itself.
A correlation of 1.
With the first lag,
a value of the chain has a correlation
a little higher than 0.5.
And as we go further along the chain,
the values become less correlated.
We can also look at the values of the auto
correlation themselves with autocorr.diag.
We run that and we look at those values.
So associated with lag 1 we have
an autocorrelation of about 0.61.
Now let's look at the auto correlation
in the example where the chain
had too small of a step size and run that.
Here we can see some pretty extreme auto
correlation persisting for many lags.
Even out past 30 lags,
we have auto-correlation which
appears to be higher than 0.5.
That is, a value in the chain has
a higher than a 0.5 correlation
with a value 30 steps behind it.
Auto correlation is important
because it tells us how much information
is available in the Markov chain.
Sampling 1000 iterations from
a highly correlated Markov chain
yields less information about
the stationary distribution than we would
obtain from 1,000 samples independently
drawn from the stationary distribution.
To illustrate this phenomenon,
let's pretend you want to find
the most popular movie in your town.
Would you get more information if you a,
randomly sampled 20 people from the town,
or b, if you conveniently
asked 20 of your friends.
Chances are that your 20 friends'
movie preferences are correlated,
because they might have similar interests.
If you conducted such
a convenient sampling scheme,
you would probably have to
sample many more opinions.
To get the same quality
of information available
from a truly random sample
of 20 people in the town.
Auotcorrelation is a major component
in calculating Monte Carlo
effective sample size in your chain.
The Monte Carlo effective sample size
is how many independent samples from the
stationary distribution you would have,
you would have to draw to have equivalent
information in your Markov chain.
Essentially it is the sample size that
we chose for our Monte Carlo estimation.
Let's look again at this chain that
has really high autocorrelation.
First let's look at
the structure of the object.
We had a very high candidate acceptance
rate because it took many steps to
go across the distribution.
And we had 100,000 samples.
Now let's calculate the effective
sample size of this chain.
The effective sample size
function is in the coda package,
and the function is called Effective Size.
We need to give it a mcmc object.
And this is a pretty dramatic difference.
Although we simulated a 100,000 samples,
the effective sample size of this
chain Is only 373, approximately.
Let's look at a long range
autocorrelation plot,
Of the chain with a 100,000 samples,
at a really long lag.
Let's go out to 500 lags.
This plot shows us that you have to go
all the way out to about 400 lags or
even further than 400 lags before
auto correlation drops to 0.
In other words, values in the chain
have to be about 400 steps
apart from each other before there are no
longer autocorrelated with each other.
What would happen then if we kept
only 1 out of every 400 iterations.
Let's do this.
We'll create a thin interval of 400, run
that and we're going to create an index.
It'll be a sequence, starting at 400,
going to 100,000.
And we'll keep every 400th number.
Let's take a look at what
this thin index gave us.
This giveS us the address of each
sample that we're going to keep
To remind ourselves let's create
a traceplot of the original chain.
And we're actually going to want to
do two plots in the same plot here.
So we can control the plotting
parameters in R using par and
if we want to have
multiple plots per frame,
we can use the mf row
command where the first
number we give it Is
the number of rows of plots.
We want two rows of plots.
And the second number is
the number of columns of plots.
We want one.
So, it creates a new window for us where
we're going to fill in the trace plots.
So, the first is the trace
plot of the original chain,
with all 100,000 iterations.
Now, I'm going to copy this line,
paste it, and
we're only going to look at the samples
that we kept after thinning.
So we'll index this by the thinning
index and run that trace plot.
Next, we'll calculate the auto
correlation for this thinned out chain.
We want the autocorr.plot.
Look at that,
the auto correlation has essentially
disappeared if we've thinned the chain
out to every 400 iterations.
What's the effect of sample size?
We'll give it the thinned chain,
calculate the effective sample size.
It's 250.
How many actual samples are there?
We can look at the length of
our thinning index sequence.
250.
So the effective sample size in this chain
is the same as the actual sample size,
because the values
are approximately uncorrelated.
To remind ourselves, let's look at
the effective sample size of the original
chain that had 100,000 iterations.
It was about 373.
Fairly close to the length
of our thinned chain.
We've now discussed two
different interpretations
of the effective sample size.
The effective sample size can be
thought of as how many independent
samples you would need to get the same
information or you could think of
it as the length of chain you would have
left over if you removed iterations or
thinned the chain until you got
rid of the auto correlation.
Now, let's compare the effective sample
size of this highly auto correlated chain,
with 100,000 iterations to the effective
sample size of our good chain,
the one that was mixing well,
but only had 4,000 iterations.
The first chain we looked at which
had good convergence properties
has an effective sample size
of nearly 1,000 out of 4,000.
Whereas the chain with high auto
correlation had a sample size,
an effective sample size of
373 out of 100,000 samples.
Clearly auto correlation
makes a big difference
in how much information you
get out of your Markov chain.
It is usually a good idea to check the
Monte Carlo effective sample size of your
chain when doing mcmc.
If all you seek is a posterior
mean estimate, then
an effective sample size of a few hundred
to a few thousand should be good enough.
However, if you want to create something
like a 95% posterior interval,
you're going to need more iterations.
You may need many thousands
of effective samples
to produce a reliable estimate of
those outer edges of the distribution.
The number you need can quickly be
calculated using the Raftery and
Lewis diagnostic that is
also available in the Coda
package using the raftery.diag function.
Here we are calculating the Raftery and
Lewis diagnostic for
that first good chain.
This diagnostic tells us
that if we want to be 95%
confident that we are estimating
the 0.25 quantile
of the distribution to
an accuracy of 0.005,
then we're going to need this
many iterations in our chain.
The number next to it here,
3,746 is the number
of independent samples we would need from
a chain that had zero autocorrelation.
With the autocorrelation in this chain,
we would need to generate a little
more then 12,000 samples to get
this degree of accuracy in
creating probability intervals.
The dependence factor increases
with auto correlation in the chain.
It tells us how many more
iterations we would need
with this particular chain
over an independent sample.
In this case,
we need about three times as many samples
to get the same amount of information.
To learn more about the Raftery and
Lewis diagnostic,
we can always check the documentation
in the coder package.
To access that, type question mark and
then the name of the function.
This opens the documentation page for
the diagnostic.
We can read a little bit
about the underlying theory.
We can learn more about which arguments
we can change in the function to get
different information.
And we also have references to
the original papers that these diagnostics
are based off of.
Just to review, the Raftery,
Lewis diagnostic gives us the number,
the sample size that we would need for
our Markov chain if we want to
create reliable posterior intervals.